CPSC 3300
Study Guide for Final Exam

The final exam will be comprehensive and include topics from the
first two exams and later materials. The coverage will be approximately be half from the first two units (Exam 1 & Exam 2 topics) and half from the last unit (topics after Exam 2), e.g.,

  Exam 1 topics (~20-25%)
    Chapter 1 - performance, benchmarks, Amdahl's Law (~50%)
    Appendix B - combinational and sequential logic design (~50%)

  Exam 2 topics (~20-25%)
    Chapter 4 - control logic, pipelining, instruction-level parallelism (100%)

  Topics after Exam 2 (~50-60%)
     Chapter 5 - semiconductor memory, memory hierarchies, cache, virtual memory (~80-90%)
     Chapter 6 - parallel processing, platforms, performance, programming (~10-20%)



Sample exams for the first two units have been made available before the respective exams. 

The following is the study guide for the third unit.

Coverage: Memory hierarchy, cache and virtual memory in Chapter 5, Flynn's taxonomy and scaling of performance of a parallel processing program in Chapter 6


1. Be able to define or match these terms

     Random access memory (RAM)
     Static RAM (SRAM)
     Dynamic RAM (DRAM)
     Refresh
  
     Memory hierarchy
     Locality
     Spatial locality
     Temporal locality
   
     Instruction cache
     Data cache
     Multilevel cache
     
     Cache hit - successful accessing of a block of the cache
     Hit rate - number of times we get a cache hit / total attempted cache accesses
     Hit time - amount of time it takes to access the cache

     Cache miss - unsuccessful accessing of a block of the cache
     Miss rate - misses in the cache divided by the total # of mem accesses to the cache
     Miss penalty
 - extra cycles to fetch the data to the cache from lower level of memory hierarchy
     Global miss rate

     Local miss rate
  
     Placement policy (fully associative, set-associative, directly mapped) - where can a block be placed in the upper level?
     Replacement policy (LRU, FIFO, random, etc.) - which block should be replaced on a miss?
     Write-hit policy (write-through or write-back) - what happens on a write?

     Cache lines (often called cache blocks)
     Tag
     Valid bit
     Dirty bit (also known as modified bit and changed bit)

     Direct-mapped cache - a memory block maps to exactly one cache block
     Set-associative cache - cache is divided into sets, each consisting of n ways.  a memory block maps to a unique set (specified by index field)
     Fully associative cache - a memory block can be mapped to any cache block

     Virtual memory
     Page
     Translation lookaside buffer
     Page table
     Virtual(logical) address / physical address
     Address translation
     Page fault


     Flinn's taxonomy: SISD, SIMD, MISD, MIMD
     Strong vs weak scaling
     Amdahl's law for parallel processing



2. Be able to:

   A. Give typical capacity, latency, and block size values for the memory hierarchy components.

   B. Identify at least one example of temporal or spatial locality of memory references.

   C. Given memory and cache parameters, give the tag, index, and offset field sizes within the main memory address.

   D. Similar questions in C for virtual memory and related questions for page tables and TLB.

   E. Given an address stream and cache parameters, determine the number of misses.

   F. Explain how row versus column access to a matrix affects cache misses. (E.g., discuss how misses were reduced in the matrix multiply example.)

   G. Given a reference sequence and memory parameters, determine the number of page faults.

   

   H. Given a workload with a serial part and a parallelizeable part, determine the maximum speedup, and given # of processors determine time (strong scaling) or problem size (weak scaling)


Be prepared to work problems as given in Homeworks 7 and 8.
